Proposal: Software Defined Networking (#4)
dev-sys-do/orka: docs/proposals/network/README.md

- isolate instance/pods with isolated networks
- apply network security policies

The *plugins* must be installed on every node in the cluster.

### Scope

- Pod-to-Pod network packets on the same host
	- Firewall (e.g. iptables)
		- Need to ACCEPT FORWARDING traffic for pod CIDR because packets are dropped by the Linux kernel by default  
		  (Linux treats network packets in non-default network namespaces as external packets by default)
	- Allow outgoing internet
- Cross-node pod-to-pod network packets
- Port mapping / Selectors pods
- DNS routing (e.g. ingress controller)
- DNS resolution (e.g. coreDNS) -> pod-to-pod and pod-to-service
	- "<NAME_SVC>.<NAMESPACE>.svc.cluster.local"
	- "<POD_IP_WITH_DASH_INSTEAD_DOT>.<NAMESPACE>.pod.cluster.local"

### Out of scope

- RBAC, Network Policies
- Monitoring network traffic (e.g. metrics-server)
- Load balancing (e.g. service)
- Load balancer (e.g. klipper, metallb)

## API - Component interface

### CNI

#### Configuration

Configuration files (`.conf`) are located in `/etc/cni/net.d/`.

Example of a configuration file:

```
{
    "cniVersion": "<VERSION>",
    "name": "<CNI_NAME>",
    "type": "<CNI_BINARY_NAME>",

>     // other variables to pass to plugin

Reviewer: I guess this is the only thing left for you to clarify until we can merge that PR.

# Software Defined Network

## Analysis

### Examples

- Flannel: good example, focused on networking
- Calico
- Weave
- Cilium

### Sources

- [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) also make a good framework for creating a new container networking project from scratch
- [Networks - treeptik k8s](https://treeptik.gitbook.io/k8s/fundamentals/)
- [Explain NS linux](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j_UUnlVC2Ss)
- [Spec - CNI](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/)

## Network domain

> ### Vocabulary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Glossary
```

> - *runtime* is the program responsible for executing CNI plugins
> - *plugin* is a program that applies a specified network configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *runtime* is the program responsible for executing CNI plugins.
- *plugin* is a program that applies a specified network configuration.
```

Also, what is the network configuration applied on? Is it node specific, container specific?

### Definition

> The *plugins* (= binaries) needs to be installed on every node in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *plugins* (= binaries) must be installed on every node in the cluster.
```

> For that, we have to create *plugins* (= binaries) implementing the CNI specifications.

Reviewer: If you specify in your glossary section that a plugin is a binary, you don't need the (= binaries) addition.

That way, the *runtime* (e.g. the node agent) can use the *plugins* to create network interfaces between pods.

The goal is to be able to:

- manage networks through the software
- isolate instance/pods with isolated networks
- apply network security policies

### Scope

- Pod-to-Pod network packets on the same host
	- Firewall (e.g. iptables)
		- Need to ACCEPT FORWARDING traffic for pod CIDR because packets are dropped by the Linux kernel by default  
		  (Linux treats network packets in non-default network namespaces as external packets by default)
	- Allow outgoing internet
- Cross-node pod-to-pod network packets
- Port mapping / Selectors pods
- DNS routing (e.g. ingress controller)
- DNS resolution (e.g. coreDNS) -> pod-to-pod and pod-to-service
	- "<NAME_SVC>.<NAMESPACE>.svc.cluster.local"
	- "<POD_IP_WITH_DASH_INSTEAD_DOT>.<NAMESPACE>.pod.cluster.local"

### Out of scope

> | Not for now                                      | Not for us |
> |--------------------------------------------------|------------|
> | RBAC, Network Policies                           | kube proxy |
> | Monitoring network traffic (e.g. metrics-server) |            |
> | Load balancing (e.g. service)                    |            | 
> | Load balancer (e.g. klipper, metallb)            |            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* RBAC and Network Policies 
* Monitoring network traffic
* Load balancing (e.g. service)
* Load balancer (e.g. klipper, metallb)
```

If the scope of your component ever changes, then you can change that section.

### Components list of a minimal k8s (sample)

- **CNI plugins** (us)
- etcd (not us)
- scheduler (not us)
- apiserver (not us)

> - controller (not us)

Reviewer: I don't see how that's related to `orka`

Reviewer 2: That's not relevant anymore, I will remove this section, okay

It was to see an example of a minimal k8s and compare it to our side, but yes it's not necessary

## API - Component interface

> ### CNI

Reviewer: So you're planning to implement a CNI-compliant plugin? That's fine with me, but this section should be very explicit about it. Something like:

```
The `orka` SDN implements the [`CNI`](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/) specification. 
It is a `CNI` plugin and must be called by e.g. the node Agent through the `CNI` specified
command line interface. It configure workloads networking according to a set of `CNI`
compliant configuration files, as described in the following sections.

```

Reviewer 2: We did say that in the [Definition section](https://github.com/dev-sys-do/orka/blob/57dc5fc4101f50b1bfdad128af6968fdcda90ec2/docs/proposals/network/README.md#definition), but maybe it was not clear enough about the link to orka SDN.

I've used your paragraph and modified it slightly to update this section ([Definition](https://github.com/dev-sys-do/orka/blob/57dc5fc4101f50b1bfdad128af6968fdcda90ec2/docs/proposals/network/README.md#definition)).

I don't know if we should explain the goal of the SDN in the API section (instead of the Definition section), I prefer the opposite to reserve the API section with more explicit explanation?

Reviewer: Yes, this is fine to me. It's clearer now, thanks.

# Software Defined Network

## Analysis

### Examples

- Canal
- Calico
- Flannel
- Weave
- Cilium

> ![benchmark-cni](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/1*zDiFQZVXuL923x0LbmXMaA.png)

Reviewer: Pretty nice. Keep in mind that simplicity and is one of our goals here, performance is not important for now.

Reviewer 2: Yes, of course, we need something that is working first

We keeped the examples section

### Sources

- [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) also makes a good framework for creating a new container networking project from scratch
- [Networks - treeptik k8s](https://treeptik.gitbook.io/k8s/fundamentals/)network
- [Explain NS linux](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j_UUnlVC2Ss)
- [Spec - CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni/blob/main/SPEC.md)

> <br>

Reviewer: br ?

Reviewer 2: Useless `br` (line break) sorry, it's removed

## Network domain

### Definition

The goal is to be able to:

- manage networks through the software
- isolate instance/pods with isolated networks
- apply network security policies

> Options:

Reviewer: FWIW, this should not be part of your final version. You have to make a decision about that as part of this architecture document.

Reviewer 2: We have specified with a `Scope` and `Out of scope`, tell us if it's better

- a library to manage networks directly from the Node Agent
- a deamon running on each worker nodes and another on the master node

> 

Reviewer: A third option is a binary to be called directly by the agent. This is the CNI approach.

Reviewer 2: Previously, we didn't understood how the CNI approach worked, but now we think it's more comprehensible

You can see our approach in the last commits:

- for the [definition](https://github.com/dev-sys-do/orka/blob/8e83b9971ca8364c6bd3aeec86938dca99cfbc0b/docs/proposals/network/README.md?plain=1#L26)
- and the [plugin implementation](https://github.com/dev-sys-do/orka/blob/8e83b9971ca8364c6bd3aeec86938dca99cfbc0b/docs/proposals/network/README.md?plain=1#L74)

### Scope

- Network security policy (access control, filtering, firewall, iptables... ?)  
  "NetworkPolicy describes what network traffic is allowed for a set of Pods"
- Virtual isolated networks by default
- Port mapping / Selectors pods
- DNS routing (e.g. ingress controller)
- DNS resolution (e.g. coreDNS)
- Monitoring network traffic (e.g. metrics-server)
- Load balancing (e.g. klipper, metallb, service)
- Streaming(?)

> - kube-proxy

Reviewer: kube-proxy is not really a feature or a requirement. Please remove that from the scope, or describe which kube-proxy features or characteristics are part of your scope.
